---
title: "Why our Elections undermine Democracy, and How to Fix it"
date: "2020-05-11"
---

Article by Guest Writer [u/JuhaJGam3R](http://www.reddit.com/u/JuhaJGam3R) (Kamray23)

Our elections, currently, require trust – most of it in the Secretary of Elections: we have to trust that the results of the calculations are right, we have to trust that all votes were counted and real and we have to trust that the calculations were even done on actual election data and not just biased data roughly tailored to fit the results. This is bad, because it lets the SoE betray that trust, with no way to check they didn’t. But it wasn’t always like this, and it doesn’t have to be. So, why would we remove that trust, and what would it require?

The ideal option is that everyone could do what the SoE does. If everyone could check the SoE’s work, check the validity of each vote, and make the calculations themselves, there would be no way for the SoE to betray trust without being noticed. This is what I call ‘third-party checking’, a check not by the government or by the SoE, but anyone. 

This system has several advantages over trusting the SoE, like preventing mistakes. If the SoE makes a mistake, and someone suspects them of making a mistake, instead of it just being there, the ‘suspector’ could check that each vote was validated correctly, that the calculations had been performed correctly, and that the results that come out truly match. 

A second, maybe more important advantage, is preventing rigging by the SoE or the government as a whole. Instead of trusting the one complex that has time and time proven itself untrustworthy on properly running what is arguably the most important system in SimDemocracy, and as such the one whose undermining has the largest motive behind it, we can move trust away to each individual person. Any suspected rigging attempt could be checked and outed, ideally by anyone motivated to do so, after which the perpetrators could be tracked down and held responsible.

Holding people responsible really is the end goal of removing trust. No longer would we have to hope and trust that people are responsible and never forge or modify results, but instead we could prove, or in the worst case, disprove that claim.

So, why is this not already in place? It seems like such a simple idea it should have been thought of when initially creating elections in a more serious manner. Truth is, it was, and it still is in effect for presidential elections. STAR, as an election system is so simple and transparent that anyone with basic knowledge of spreadsheets and five minutes of time can replicate the calculations. The verification code system is ephemeral, you can verify codes not only from the newest election, but all other elections, whenever, and however many times you’d like to. But I only said that presidential elections have this, which begs the question, what’s the problem with senate elections? To find out, we have to look a bit in the past, and compare that to the present.

Bloc scoring was an extremely simple system, and was the main method by which senators were elected for the longest time. It was so simple it could be explained to anyone in a single sentence minutes: average the scores given to each candidate, order them in descending order, and pick the top candidates one by one until the senate is full. That, in all its simplicity, was all it was. That allows not only the most gifted of technical folk but everyone to understand how the subreddit runs.

Because of its simplicity, bloc scoring was a very easy system to use. Really, by its description, anyone who knows how to take the average of cells in a spreadsheet should be able to do it. That made it possible, given all the ballots, for anyone to verify and recalculate the election results, exactly as we’ve established it should be.

Back when we used bloc scoring, raw ballot data was more or less released by the SoE. Not in the rawest, most ideal form, but in a form that’s easy to do calculations with, as part of the calculation spreadsheet; this included the verification codes. Therefore ballots could be verified by anyone, and they could easily be used for checking the work the SoE had done. 

Bloc scoring was nearly ideal when it came to holding the SoE responsible and removing their trust, but we don’t use it anymore. Instead, we changed to a proportional representation system called SPSV. So, there must be something wrong with how that runs, otherwise this essay wouldn’t even be necessary: we already had a near ideal situation before.

The largest source of problems is that SPSV as a system is inherently complex. It has abstract and unintuitive concepts like virtual ballots, something called a “Kotze-Pereira transformation” to generate those, ballot weights and some odd system for reweighing ballots. I don’t understand it, the SoE usually doesn’t understand it, and it seems like keeping track of everything is something that can only be done through a script.

The complexity of SPSV results in it being extremely difficult to be done by just anyone. It requires such an immense amount of variables and math that to do it by hand would require a wall-sized piece of paper and multiple hours of calculation, leaving a script as the only way to really do it. The complex and abstract nature of the whole system makes it hard for even technical folk to check whether the script does what it’s supposed to, and no-one can catch a mistake by just eyeing the calculations, unlike with bloc voting where the math involved was extremely simple. As a result, not even the SoE can check if whoever coded the script added some amount of bias into it. SPSV, as I said before, is inherently complex, and can never be like bloc scoring was.

This script isn’t linked anywhere near the results, so it’s hard to check if the script even works. Catching any malicious or even accidental problems is literally impossible as not even the technical folk can easily just eye over the script and see how it works. Even if they did understand it, if the script isn’t visible, it can’t be checked for bugs or bias.

Since SPSV was adopted, transparency has also gone down. Even if someone had a working version of a working script with no bias, they couldn’t use it. Only the SoE can. That’s right, since adopting the SPSV for senatorial elections, raw ballots are no longer being released to the public, and as such it’s impossible to check the work of the SoE regardless of whether you have a script or not. This, of course, is not the system’s fault, but instead the blame is on the SoE and the legislation that allows them to hide the ballots.

So, SPSV is inherently a bad system for an online democracy, not because it can’t produce accurate results, in fact quite the opposite, it’s great and gives us proportional representation no, instead the problem is it’s inherent complexity, something which can’t be ironed out of the system without changing how it works and how it is proportional. The ideal fix then, is to find a great compromise, a system that is as proportional as possible while staying simple enough to be universally checkable, simple enough for anyone with a few minutes and enough motivation to confirm is right. That, however, will take sometime. Luckily, while waiting for someone to find such a system, there are things we can do to make the current system better in some ways.

The script, for one, has to be made more clearly public. Linking to the code in the election results is the ideal option. When technical folk can easily enough read and check that the code works, there should be much less danger of bias. Similarly educating the GP at large on how SPSV works in depth would support the efforts to find possible bugs or bias in the script. 

The SoE also has to be made to actually give out the raw ballots as a spreadsheet. What use is the script if we can’t check that that’s the one that was actually used? Giving everyone the ability to do exactly what the SoE did is the end goal, so to work towards that, we must release the ballots as well as the calculations. It’s not like people can just find mistakes by eye in the calculations after the ballots are public, but at least they can do something to recalculate and confirm the results.

Now, some may be worried about the safety of releasing the tools we use to the general public, in case someone malicious finds a problem and abuses it. This is, however, the oldest fallacy in security, the “security through obscurity” argument. No matter how you look at it, security holes aren’t fixed by hiding them. Indeed, some of the largest security problems in the world at large have been found and fixed _because_ the code is public. Sure, it carries some risk, but in the long run it’s worth it to get the code out there so that people can find and fix problems, even from a purely security-focused perspective.

It’s also worth it to question why we need to remove trust in the first place. Why can’t we just get a very trustworthy SoE instead? Removing trust even if the SoE is trustworthy makes sense, because as long as the SoE is human, they have their own goals and motivations, and there are ways to sway them. Not needing to trust someone is always better when it comes to critically important systems like elections are on SimDemocracy. Removing trust makes sense because it makes the system harder to rig and more resistant to human error.

You might also be worried about the proportionality of a system like SPSV, and whether reaching proportionality should be favoured over making elections more robust. This, of course, is a judgement for everyone to make by themselves, but I for one value some level of democracy over a perfectly proportional democracy which can be undermined with the flick of a wrist. I don’t dislike SPSV for proportionality, no, instead I love it for the reason that it is proportional, I just feel like it’s not something we should trade democracy for.

All in all SPSV is the perfect system for democracy, but fails because it makes undermining it so easy. Changing the entire system would be ideal, but that may not be possible, and at least for now, it might be worth it to push for legislation requiring more transparency on the part of the SoE instead. Either way, there’s a problem that needs fixing, and a plan for how to fix it. All we need now is for the senate to start fixing it. So, for senators, think about how we could fix this, think about the fixes I propose here, and create bills to help the problem. As for the general public, help the senators, demand that they take action to fix the problem, and be vocal about your opinion on the issue. The foundation of SimDemocracy is currently broken, and we have to fix it.
